## Peptide Quantification {.page_break_before}

Discussion of methods to isotopically label peptides or proteins that enable quantification

1. SILAC/SILAM
2. iTRAQ
3. TMT

# Dimethyl labeling [@doi:10.1098/rsta.2015.0364; @doi:10.1038/nprot.2009.21]
Dimethyl labeling is a chemical labeling technique that involves the covalent attachment of stable isotopes to the amino groups of the peptides in a protein sample. 
In this technique, isotopes of formaldehyde and cyanoborohydride are combined into the sample in which labeled peptides will have a mass difference. [@doi:10.1038/nprot.2009.21] 
This reaction results in the covalent attachment of a dimethyl group in the primary amines (particularly in the N terminus and side chain of lysine residues). 
The formaldehyde can be labeled with deuterium or carbon-13, which results in the incorporation of the labeled methyl group into the peptide. 
This labeling process can be performed on either the N-terminus or the lysine residues of the peptides.
For a step by step way of doing dimethylating a sample, the following publication has it in the material and methods section: [@doi:10.1038/nprot.2009.21].


<!-- todo: not sure if this is the best place for this figure about quantification strategies, do we need a whole section on quant? -->

![**Quantitative strategies commonly used in proteomics.**
A) Label-free quantitation. 
Proteins are extracted from samples, enzymatically hydrolyzed into peptides and analyzed by mass spectrometry.
Chromatographic peak areas from peptides are compared across samples that are analyzed sequentially. 
B) Metabolic labelling. 
Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) is based on feeding cells stable isotope labeled amino acids (“light” or “heavy”). 
Samples grown with heavy or light amino acids are mixed before cell lysis.
The relative intensities of the heavy and light peptide are used to compute protein changes between samples.
C) Isobaric or chemical labelling. 
Proteins are isolated separately from samples, enzymatically hydrolyzed into peptides, and then chemically tagged with isobaric stable isotope labels. 
These isobaric tags produce unique reporter mass-to-charge (m/z) signals that are produced upon fragmentation with MS/MS. 
Peptide fragment ions are used to identify peptides, and the relative reporter ion signals are used for quantification.
](images/Summay_peptide-protein-labeling_.svg){#fig:quant-summary tag="1" width="100%"}


